scout: metrics exporter endpoint (#19854)
docker/docs: content/scout/metrics-exporter.md

This block defines the PAT as a bearer token stored in a file:

```yaml
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: $ORG
    authorization:
      type: Bearer
      credentials_file: /etc/prometheus/token
```

The content of the file should be the PAT in plain text:

```console
dckr_pat_...
```

If you are running Prometheus in a Docker container or Kubernetes pod, mount the file into the container using a volume or secret.

Finally, restart Prometheus to apply the changes.

## Sample project

If you don't have a Prometheus server set up, you can run a [sample project](https://github.com/dockersamples/scout-metrics-exporter) using Docker Compose.
The sample includes a Prometheus server that scrapes metrics for a Docker organization enrolled in Docker Scout,
alongside Grafana with a pre-configured dashboard to visualize the vulnerability and policy metrics.

1. Clone the starter template for bootstrapping a set of Compose services
   for scraping and visualizing the Docker Scout metrics endpoint:

   ```console
   $ git clone git@github.com:dockersamples/scout-metrics-exporter.git
   ```

2. [Create a Docker access token](/security/for-developers/access-tokens/#create-an-access-token)

>    and store it in a plain text file named `token.txt` in the template directory.

Reviewer: I'd rather keep the file name as `token` (without extension), otherwise we'd also need to change the `credentials_file` in the Prometheus config to include the `.txt` extension.

>    and store it in a plain text file named `token.txt` in the template directory.

Reviewer: The token file must be placed in the `prometheus` dir.

```suggestion
   and store it in a plain text file named `token` in the `prometheus` drectory.
```

   replace `ORG` in the `metrics_path` property on line 6 with the namespace of your Docker organization.

   ```yaml {title="prometheus/prometheus.yml",hl_lines="6",linenos=1}
   global:
     scrape_interval: 60s
     scrape_timeout: 40s
   scrape_configs:
     - job_name: Docker Scout policy
       metrics_path: /v1/exporter/org/<ORG>
       scheme: https
       static_configs:
         - targets:
             - api.scout.docker.com
       authorization:
         type: Bearer
         credentials_file: /etc/prometheus/token
   ```

4. Start the compose services.

   ```console
   docker compose up -d
   ```

   This command starts two services: the Prometheus server and Grafana.
   Prometheus scrapes metrics from the Docker Scout endpoint,
   and Grafana visualizes the metrics using a pre-configured dashboard.

To stop the demo and clean up any resources created, run:

```console
docker compose down -v
```

### Access to Prometheus

After starting the services, you can access the Prometheus expression browser by visiting <http://localhost:9090>.
The Prometheus server runs in a Docker container and is accessible on port 9090.

> After a few seconds, you should see the metrics endpoint as a target in the Prometheus UI.
> You can view the metrics scraped by Prometheus by visiting <http://localhost:9090/targets>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a few seconds, you should see the metrics endpoint as a target in the Prometheus UI at <http://localhost:9090/targets>.
```

Reviewer: You may also want to include a screenshot like:

![image](https://github.com/docker/docs/assets/15997951/f2740b11-612c-4d85-a1ff-9a3634acda83)

### Viewing the metrics in Grafana

> To view the Grafana dashboard, go to <http://localhost:3000>,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To view the Grafana dashboards, go to <http://localhost:3000/dashboards>,
```

and sign in using the credentials defined in the Docker Compose file (username: `admin`, password: `grafana`).

> The dashboard is pre-configured to visualize the vulnerability and policy metrics scraped by Prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dashboards are pre-configured to visualize the vulnerability and policy metrics scraped by Prometheus.

> 

Reviewer: WDYT about adding a couple of screenshots (one for the overview dashboard where the vuln trends graph lives, and another for the policy dashboard)?

Author: I'll add a screenshot, I try to avoid having too many of them since they're cumbersome to maintain

| `scout_policy_evaluated_images` | Total images evaluated against a policy in a stream | `id`, `displayName`, `streamName` | Gauge |

## Creating a Personal Access Token (PAT)

To export metrics from your organization, first make sure your organization is enrolled in Docker Scout. Then, create a Personal Access Token (PAT) - a secret token that allows the exporter to authenticate with the Docker Scout API.

The PAT does not require any specific permissions, but it must be created by a user who is an **owner of the Docker organization**.
To create a PAT, follow the steps in [Create an access token](/security/for-developers/access-tokens/#create-an-access-token).

Once you have created the PAT, store it in a secure location.
You will need to provide this token to the exporter when scraping metrics.

## Configure Prometheus

### Add a job for your organization

In the Prometheus configuration file, add a new job for your organization.
The job should include the following configuration;
replace `ORG` with your organization name:

```yaml
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: $ORG

>     honor_timestamps: true

Reviewer: `honor_timestamps: true` can be removed

---
title: Docker Scout metrics exporter
description: |
  Learn how to scrape data from Docker Scout using Prometheus to create your own
  vulnerability and policy dashboard wiht Grafana
keywords: scout, exporter, prometheus, grafana, metrics, dashboard, api, compose
---

Docker Scout exposes a metrics HTTP endpoint that lets you scrape vulnerability
and policy data from Docker Scout, using Prometheus. By scraping this endpoint,
you can create your own, self-hosted Docker Scout dashboard for visualizing
metrics about your images, using a self-hosted dashboard.

## Metrics

The metrics endpoint exposes the following metrics:

| Metric                          | Description                                         | Labels                            | Type  |
| ------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------- | ----- |

> | `scout_stream_vulnerabilities`  | Vulnerabilities in a stream                         | `streamName`                      | Gauge |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `scout_stream_vulnerabilities`  | Vulnerabilities in a stream                         | `streamName`, `severity`                      | Gauge |
```

This block defines the PAT as a bearer token stored in a file:

```yaml
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: $ORG
    authorization:
      type: Bearer
      credentials_file: /etc/prometheus/token
```

The content of the file should be the PAT in plain text:

```console
dckr_pat_...
```

If you are running Prometheus in a Docker container or Kubernetes pod, mount the file into the container using a volume or secret.

Finally, restart Prometheus to apply the changes.

## Compose example

If you don't have a Prometheus server set up, you can run a demo using Docker Compose.
The demo includes a Prometheus server that scrapes metrics for a Docker organization enrolled in Docker Scout,
alongside Grafana with a pre-configured dashboard to visualize the vulnerability and policy metrics.

1. Download the starter template for bootstrapping a set of Compose services
   for scraping and visualizing the Docker Scout metrics endpoint:

   <a href="/assets/files/scout-metrics-template.zip" download>Download template</a>

2. Unzip and `cd` into the directory.

   ```console
   $ unzip scout-metrics-template.zip
   $ cd scout-metrics-template

>    ```

Reviewer: I'd rather use a public repo for the demo assets. This way if we need to make a change (like updating a dashboard with more graphs) we won't need to re-upload the .zip file.

Author: Sure. I've pinged the devrel team to help me set up a repository for this under the `dockersamples` org. I'll update here when that's all set up

Author: Done, I've created a repo and uploaded the files there. It's referred to from this guide now. PTAL (repo here: https://github.com/dockersamples/scout-metrics-exporter)

       authorization:
         type: Bearer
         credentials_file: /etc/prometheus/token
   ```

4. Start the compose services.

   ```console
   docker compose up -d
   ```

   This command starts two services: the Prometheus server and Grafana.
   Prometheus scrapes metrics from the Docker Scout endpoint,
   and Grafana visualizes the metrics using a pre-configured dashboard.

To stop the demo and clean up any resources created, run:

```console
docker compose down -v
```

### Access to Prometheus

After starting the services, you can access the Prometheus expression browser by visiting <http://localhost:9090>.
The Prometheus server runs in a Docker container and is accessible on port 9090.

After a few seconds, you should see the metrics endpoint as a target in the
Prometheus UI at <http://localhost:9090/targets>.

![Docker Scout metrics exporter Prometheus target](./images/scout-metrics-prom-target.png "Docker Scout metrics exporter Prometheus target")

### Viewing the metrics in Grafana

To view the Grafana dashboards, go to <http://localhost:3000/dashboards>,
and sign in using the credentials defined in the Docker Compose file (username: `admin`, password: `grafana`).

> ![Policy dashboard in Grafana](./images/scout-metrics-grafana.png "Policy dashboard in Grafana")

Author: yeah I can add an example to the images page
